#7: Added TLS tutorial (#9)
exasol/exasol-java-tutorial: tls-tutorial/doc/tls_in_udfs.md

# TLS in User Defined Functions (UDFs)

## Before you Start

If you haven't already, I recommend you read our ["TLS introduction"](tls_in_udfs.md) to familiarize yourself with the basic concepts of TLS.

You should familiarize yourself with Exasol's [BucketFS](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/bucketfs.htm) filesystem.

You will also need:

> 1. A Java Development Kit (JDK 11 or later, we recommend [OpenJDK](https://openjdk.org/install/))

Reviewer: Won't a JRE be sufficient?

Author: For running - yes. But the JDK has the added benefits of JavaDoc and the chance to look into the SDK code to see what's going on. After all, this is tutorial mainly targeted at developers.

2. `keytool` program (comes with the JDK)
3. [`curl`](https://curl.se/) to access BucketFS and download file from the internet

## UDFs

> A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend the Exasol database with new features that can be called from within Exasol SQL statements. Basically. A UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.

Reviewer: "Basically. A" -> "Basically, a".

> A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend the Exasol database with new features that can be called from within Exasol SQL statements. Basically. A UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend the Exasol database with new features that can be called from within Exasol SQL statements. Basically, a UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.
```

> Each UDF runs in a sandbox that only lives in the context of a single statement. This ensures that UDF can't be used to escape the boundaries of the statement it belongs too and prevents data leakage.

Reviewer: "belongs too" -> "belongs to"

> Each UDF runs in a sandbox that only lives in the context of a single statement. This ensures that UDF can't be used to escape the boundaries of the statement it belongs too and prevents data leakage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each UDF runs in a sandbox that only lives in the context of a single statement. This ensures that UDF can't be used to escape the boundaries of the statement it belongs to and prevents data leakage.
```

While the sandbox makes the UDF more secure, it unfortunately makes using TLS harder.

## Language Containers

> A UDF can be written in an arbitrary programming language but requires an appropriate runtime environment that can be provided as a so-called "Language Container". The Exasol database ships with a standard container providing the runtime environment for Java and Python. Other containers and updates for the standard container are [available for download on GitHub](https://github.com/exasol/script-languages-release/releases).

Reviewer: "ships" -> "is shipped", though not 100% sure here.

How about R?

Author: Changed. You are right, R is contained as well, even if that version is a bit dated. There is a separate container with a newer version, but that is not in the scope of this article.

## Certificate Validation in UDFs

The introduction talked about how certificates are used to authenticate communication partners in TLS. As you might remember, you need a valid chain of certificates down to a certification agency (CA) that you trust.

Since the UDF runs in a sandbox, it can only see what the sandbox provides. That means without extra effort the UDF can only validate TLS certificates down to a CA certificate available in the sandbox (i.e. the language container). This is usually no problem if you want to access a service on the Internet, because in almost all cases services exposed to the internet have certificates that can be traced down to one of the well-established CAs. And the certificates for these CAs are shipped with the language container.

### Listing the Standard Certificates

This tutorial comes with a UDF that can be built into the JAR `tls-tutorial.jar`. You can install the JAR by following these steps:

1. Change to the base directory of this `exasol-java-tutorial`
2. If you haven't already, build the binaries (JAR files)
   ```shell

>    mvn clean verify

Reviewer: Will we provide a pre-complied JAR as well? Say, as a release.

Author: Yes. CI build will be another PR.

   ```
3. Upload the JAR to the default bucket
   ```shell

>    curl -v -X PUT http://w:<write-password>@<host>:2580/default/tls-tutorial.jar -T tls-tutorial/target/tls-tutorial.jar

Reviewer: Was "http" preferred over "https" on purpose? :)
If you are to switch, don't forget about "-k" that is usually needed.

Also, at least some of curl flavors allow to provide just a target folder ("<host>:2580/default/" in our case). It might make the whole command easier to grasp => slightly less error prone.

Both suggestions apply to all CURL examples on the page (there are several).

Author: Yes, that is intentional to keep the scope of the tutorial to the problem at hand. I did not want to turn this into a BucketFS tutorial.
But that reminds me that a BucketFS tutorial might not be a bad idea in the future.

8. Run the UDF inside a `SELECT` statement

For your convenience here is the complete SQL code for the steps above that need to be taken in a SQL client.
```sql
CREATE SCHEMA JAVA_TUTORIAL;

CREATE OR REPLACE JAVA SCALAR SCRIPT JAVA_TUTORIAL.CERTIFICATES()
EMITS (NAME VARCHAR(2000), ORG VARCHAR(2000), ORG_UNIT VARCHAR(2000),
       COUNTRY VARCHAR(2))
AS
    %jar /buckets/bfsdefault/default/tls-tutorial.jar;
    %scriptclass com.exasol.javatutorial.tls.Certificates;
/;

SELECT JAVA_TUTORIAL.CERTIFICATES() ORDER BY NAME;
```

Here are the first few rows of an example output.

| CN                             | O                          | OU       | C        |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------|----------|----------|
| AAA Certificate Services       | Comodo CA Limited          |          | GB       |
| ACCVRAIZ1                      | ACCV                       | PKIACCV  | ES       |
| Actalis Authentication Root CA | Actalis S.p.A./03358520967 |          | IT       |
| AffirmTrust Commercial         | AffirmTrust                |          | US       |
| &hellip;                       | &hellip;                   | &hellip; | &hellip; |

> This script is especially helpful if you want to find out, which CA certificates are available in you UDF.

Reviewer: "you"  -> "your"

Author: Fixed.

```shell
keytool -list -keystore "$truststore_file"
```

This is what you should see (import date will be different in your case of course):

```
Keystore type: PKCS12
Keystore provider: SUN

Your keystore contains 1 entry

isrg_root_x1, Nov 28, 2022, trustedCertEntry,
Certificate fingerprint (SHA-256): 96:BC:EC:06:26:49:76:F3:74:60:77:9A:CF:28:C5:A7:CF:E8:A3:C0:AA:E1:1A:8F:FC:EE:05:C0:BD:DF:08:C
```

Congratulations, you just created your very own Java truststore. Now, let's use it.

### Uploading the Truststore to BucketFS

We are going to use [`curl` to upload the truststore](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/file_access.htm#cURL) file to the default bucket.

```shell
curl -v -X PUT "http://w:<write-password>@<host>:2580/default/$truststore_file" -T "$truststore_file"
```

We use `curl` in verbose mode (`-v`), so that we can see if the upload actually succeeded by checking for this line in the output:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK

Additionally, we check the contents of the default bucket to verify we have everything in place:

```shell

> curl "http://localhost:2580/default"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl "http://<host>:2580/default"
```

Integrity on the other hand matters here. If an attacker manages to sneak a malicious certificate into your truststore, your certificate validation process is compromised.

Does the truststore password help here? Not really. Since the same password is used for reading and writing, you cannot keep it completely secret. That would only be the case if the truststore itself used asymmetric encryption. So if the truststore password isn't the answer, you need to protect the file instead.

In an operating system this is usually achieved by restricting write access to the truststore to privileged users. You can emulate this for UDFs.

1. [Create a private bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/create_new_bucket_in_bucketfs_service.htm) that only privileged users (e.g. the DBA) have write access to
2. Chose a non-guessable write-password for the bucket
3. Chose a non-guessable read-password for the bucket that differs from the write-password

> 4. [Create a connection object for the bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/database_access.htm) with the read-password

Reviewer: As there are GRANT CONNECTION and GRANT ACCESS ON CONNECTION commands, we need to be careful in 4. and 5. here.
I don't see a single-word change, but anticipate some confusion.

Author: Agreed. Created issue #12 to fix this.

# TLS in User Defined Functions (UDFs)

## Before you Start

If you haven't already, I recommend you read our ["TLS introduction"](tls_in_udfs.md) to familiarize yourself with the basic concepts of TLS.

You should familiarize yourself with Exasol's [BucketFS](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/bucketfs.htm) filesystem.

You will also need:

1. A Java Development Kit (JDK 11 or later, we recommend [OpenJDK](https://openjdk.org/install/))
2. `keytool` program (comes with the JDK)
3. [`curl`](https://curl.se/) to access BucketFS and download file from the internet

## UDFs

> A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend Exasol with new features that can be called from within SQL statements. Basically, they are programs that run on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. They get their parameters from the SQL statement and their return values can be used by other parts of the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend Exasol database with new features that can be called from within Exasol SQL statements. Basically. A UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.
```

> UDFs run in a sandbox that only lives in the context of a single statement. This ensures that UDFs can't be used to escape the boundaries of the statement they belong too and prevents data leakage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each UDF runs in a sandbox that only lives in the context of a single statement. This ensures that UDF can't be used to escape the boundaries of the statement it belongs too and prevents data leakage.
```

> While the sandbox makes UDFs more secure, it unfortunately makes using TLS harder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the sandbox makes the UDF more secure, it unfortunately makes using TLS harder.
```

## Language Containers

> UDFs can be written in multiple programming languages, requiring different runtime environments. Those environments are provided by our so-called "Language Containers". A standard container for Java and Python is shipped with Exasol. Other containers and updates for the standard container are [available for download on GitHub](https://github.com/exasol/script-languages-release/releases).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A UDF can be written in an arbitrary programming language but requires an appropriate runtime environment that can be provided as a so-called "Language Container". Exasol database ships with a standard container providing the runtime environment for Java and Python. Other containers and updates for the standard container are [available for download on GitHub](https://github.com/exasol/script-languages-release/releases).
```

All UDFs require such a language container &mdash; except Lua UDFs, since Lua is embedded directly into the Exasol engine.

## Running UDFs

Whenever you run a SQL statement that contains a UDF, Exasol starts the corresponding language container. This serves both as a runtime environment and as a sandbox at the same time. Everything the UDF does happens inside the running container. Once the statement's execution is complete, Exasol terminates the container.

## Certificate Validation in UDFs

> In the introduction I talked about how certificates are used to authenticate communication partners in TLS. As you might remember, you need a valid chain of certificates down to a certification agency (CA) that you trust.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The introduction talked about how certificates are used to authenticate communication partners in TLS. As you might remember, you need a valid chain of certificates down to a certification agency (CA) that you trust.
```

> Since UDFs run in a sandbox, they can only see what the sandbox provides. That means without extra effort UDFs can only validate TLS certificates down to a CA certificate available in the sandbox (i.e. the language container). This is usually no problem if you want to access a service on the Internet, because in almost all cases services exposed to the internet have certificates that can be traced down to one of the well-established CAs. And the certificates for these CAs are shipped with the language container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the UDF runs in a sandbox, they can only see what the sandbox provides. That means without extra effort the UDF can only validate TLS certificates down to a CA certificate available in the sandbox (i.e. the language container). This is usually no problem if you want to access a service on the Internet, because in almost all cases services exposed to the internet have certificates that can be traced down to one of the well-established CAs. And the certificates for these CAs are shipped with the language container.
```

### Listing the Standard Certificates

> This tutorial comes with a UDF that can be built into the JAR `tls-tutorial.jar`. You can install it by following these steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial comes with a UDF that can be built into the JAR `tls-tutorial.jar`. You can install the jar by following these steps:
```

```sql
CREATE SCHEMA JAVA_TUTORIAL;

CREATE OR REPLACE JAVA SCALAR SCRIPT JAVA_TUTORIAL.CERTIFICATES()
EMITS (NAME VARCHAR(2000), ORG VARCHAR(2000), ORG_UNIT VARCHAR(2000),
       COUNTRY VARCHAR(2))
AS
    %jar /buckets/bfsdefault/default/tls-tutorial.jar;
    %scriptclass com.exasol.javatutorial.tls.Certificates;
/;

SELECT JAVA_TUTORIAL.CERTIFICATES() ORDER BY NAME;
```

Here are the first few rows of an example output.

| CN                             | O                          | OU       | C        |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------|----------|----------|
| AAA Certificate Services       | Comodo CA Limited          |          | GB       |
| ACCVRAIZ1                      | ACCV                       | PKIACCV  | ES       |
| Actalis Authentication Root CA | Actalis S.p.A./03358520967 |          | IT       |
| AffirmTrust Commercial         | AffirmTrust                |          | US       |
| &hellip;                       | &hellip;                   | &hellip; | &hellip; |

This script is especially helpful if you want to find out, which CA certificates are available in you UDF.

> It goes without saying that if a certificate is missing, trust chains based on it cannot be verified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It goes without saying that if a certificate is missing, trust chains based on it cannot be verified and access to corresponding services will fail.
```

> The column names are path element for the so-called "distinguished name" (DN) of the certificate. Think of that name as a unique identifier. The elements are "common name" (CN), organization (O), organizational unit (OU), country (C). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each column corresponds to a path element for the so-called "distinguished name" (DN) of the certificate. Think of that name as a unique identifier. The elements are "common name" (CN), "organization" (O), "organizational unit" (OU), and "country" (C). 
```

### Self-issued Certificates and UDFs

> If you want your UDF to connect to a service on your own premisses, chances are the TLS certificate it uses was issued by our very own CA &mdash; of your organization's CA for that matter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want your UDF to connect to a service on your own premises, chances are that the corresponding TLS certificate was issued by your own CA or your organization's CA for that matter.
```

Now things are starting to get interesting. One thing is for sure, you won't find that certificate in the language container &mdash; unless you are planning to build your own, but that has its own learning curve and would also go way beyond the scope of this tutorial.

A better way to use your own certificates with UDFs is to create a truststore in [BucketFS](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/bucketfs.htm). BucketFS is a distributed filesystem that makes files available to all data nodes on an Exasol cluster. It is also the only filesystem accessible from a UDF, except the read-only filesystem of the language container.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### An Example Truststore For Our Experiments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### An Example Truststore For This Tutorial
```

The [Let's Encrypt Organization](https://letsencrypt.org) has a nice [page where you can see how they build their own certificate chains](https://letsencrypt.org/certificates/). You also find download links for their root CA certificates there.

The shell script below goes through the following steps:

1. Creates a directory where we store the files for our experiments
2. Change to the directory
3. Download the [ISRG Root X1 certificate](https://letsencrypt.org/certs/isrgrootx1.pem) from the Let's Encrypt website in PEM format
4. Create a new truststore and import the ISRG Root X1 certificate

```shell
export tls_tutorial_dir='/tmp/tls_tutorial'
export truststore_file='tls-tutorial-truststore'
mkdir -p "$tls_tutorial_dir"
cd "$tls_tutorial_dir"
curl -O https://letsencrypt.org/certs/isrgrootx1.pem
keytool -import -file 'isrgrootx1.pem' -alias 'ISRG_Root_X1' -keystore "$truststore_file"
```

You have to provide a password now to protect your new keystore. For this tutorial simply use `tutorial`. Obviously in a real world scenario, you would generate a non-guessable password with your favorite password manager.

> The directory no contains the downloaded PEM file and the truststore that we just created. You can verify that the truststore only contains the certificate we just imported like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directory now contains the downloaded PEM file and the truststore that we just created. You can verify that the truststore only contains the certificate we just imported like this:
```

```shell
keytool -list -keystore "$truststore_file"
```

This is what you should see (import date will be different in your case of course):

```
Keystore type: PKCS12
Keystore provider: SUN

Your keystore contains 1 entry

isrg_root_x1, Nov 28, 2022, trustedCertEntry,
Certificate fingerprint (SHA-256): 96:BC:EC:06:26:49:76:F3:74:60:77:9A:CF:28:C5:A7:CF:E8:A3:C0:AA:E1:1A:8F:FC:EE:05:C0:BD:DF:08:C
```

Congratulations, you just created your very own Java truststore. Now, let's use it.

### Uploading the Truststore to BucketFS

We are going to use [`curl` to upload the truststore](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/file_access.htm#cURL) file to the default bucket.

```shell
curl -v -X PUT "http://w:<write-password>@<host>:2580/default/$truststore_file" -T "$truststore_file"
```

> Note that you need to replace the write-password and host with their actual values.

Reviewer 2: Line 50 already describes a curl command. Should we move the sentence about the placeholders up?

Author: Indeed. Done.

We use `curl` in verbose mode (`-v`), so that we can see if the upload actually succeeded by checking for this line in the output:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK

> List the contents of the default bucket to verify we have everything in place:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally we check the contents of the default bucket to verify we have everything in place:
```

Does the truststore password help here? Not really. Since the same password is used for reading and writing, you cannot keep it completely secret. That would only be the case if the truststore itself used asymmetric encryption. So if the truststore password isn't the answer, you need to protect the file instead.

In an operating system this is usually achieved by restricting write access to the truststore to privileged users. You can emulate this for UDFs.

1. [Create a private bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/create_new_bucket_in_bucketfs_service.htm) that only privileged users (e.g. the DBA) have write access to
2. Chose a non-guessable write-password for the bucket
3. Chose a non-guessable read-password for the bucket that differs from the write-password
4. [Create a connection object for the bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/database_access.htm) with the read-password
5. [Grant access to the connection object](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/sql/grant.htm?Highlight=connection) to the users that will use the truststore in their UDFs
6. Upload the truststore file to that bucket using the write-password

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

In summary we propose to live with a simple truststore password and to refer to the items in the list above in order to gain an acceptable level of security.
```
